Van Gogh's letter from Arles to Auvers 
-notes are for the explanation


-
From: Vincent van Gogh
To: Theo van Gogh
Date: Arles, Tuesday, 21 February 1888

My dear Theo,
During the journey I thought at least as much about you as about the new country I was seeing.1
But I tell myself that you’ll perhaps come here often yourself later on. It seems to me almost impossible to be able to work in Paris, unless you have a refuge in which to recover and regain your peace of mind and self-composure. Without that, you’d be bound to get utterly numbed.
Now I’ll tell you that for a start, there’s been a snowfall of at least 60 centimetres all over, and it’s still snowing.
Arles doesn’t seem any bigger than Breda or Mons to me.2
Before reaching Tarascon3 I noticed some magnificent scenery — huge yellow rocks, oddly jumbled together, with the most imposing shapes.
In the small valleys between these rocks there were  1v:2 rows of little round trees with olive-green or grey-green foliage, which could well be lemon trees.
But here in Arles the land seems flat.
I noticed some magnificent plots of red earth planted with vines, with mountains in the background of the most delicate lilac. And the landscape under the snow with the white peaks against a sky as bright as the snow was just like the winter landscapes the Japanese did.
Here’s my address

Restaurant Carrel
30 rue Cavalerie
Arles4

So far I’ve taken no more than a little walk round the town, as I was more or less completely done in last night.
I’ll write to you soon — an antique dealer whose shop I went into yesterday in this very street was telling me he knew of a Monticelli.5
With a good handshake to you and the pals.

Yours truly,
Vincent
notes
1. In a letter written to his sister Willemien on 24 and 26 February 1888, Theo reported that Vincent left for Arles in the south of France ‘last Sunday’; this was therefore Sunday, 19 February. Since Theo also wrote that the journey would take a ‘day and night’, Vincent must have reached Arles on Monday, 20 February (FR b914). In his letter Theo explained Vincent’s motives for going to Arles: he was looking for lighter colours than he could find in the north, and he wanted to recover his physical strength. The stay in Arles was originally intended to be temporary, and Van Gogh was planning to go on to Marseille later. (See Documentation, 24 and 26 February 1888).
2. The provincial town of Breda in Brabant had around 22,000 inhabitants at that time; the mining town of Mons in the Borinage had some 25,500. The commune of Arles, including the surrounding villages, had 23,500 inhabitants in 1888 (ACA). The town itself had a population of about 13,300 in 1888. See Murphy 2016, pp. 38, 265 (n. 10).
3. Van Gogh took the express train from Paris to Marseille (the ‘Paris-Lyon-Méditerranée’) that left at 9.40 p.m. on Sunday 19 February and arrived in Arles at 4.49 p.m. the following day. The train passed through Tarascon, a small town about 20 km to the north of Arles. See Murphy 2016, pp. 25, 36, 263 (n. 33), 264 (n. 3).
4. Between the end of February and early May Van Gogh rented a room from Albert Carrel and Cathérine Carrel-Garcin. Hotel-Restaurant Carrel was at 30 rue Amédée-Pichot, in the northern part of the town. This section of the street was known as rue de la Cavalerie until 1887; Van Gogh was therefore using the old address. The hotel was a ‘two-storey house, small terrace on top and balcony on the first floor’ (maison à deux étages, petite terrasse au-dessus et balcon au premier). See Coquiot 1923, p. 161. In the official deeds the name is spelled ‘Carel’ (ACA and L’indicateur marseillais 1888).
5. Van Gogh wrote that the antique dealer had his premises ‘in this very street’; however the address books do not record any in rue Amédée-Pichot or rue de la Cavalerie. The closest antique dealer was Berthet, 5 rue de la Sous-Préfecture, just off rue Amédée-Pichot.


-
From: Vincent van Gogh
To: Theo van Gogh
Date: Arles, on or about Friday, 24 February 1888

My dear Theo,
Thanks for your kind letter and the 50-franc note.
So far I’m not finding living here as profitable as I might have hoped,1 but I’ve finished three studies,2 which I would probably not have been able to do in Paris these days.
I was glad the news from Holland was fairly satisfactory. As far as Reid goes, I wouldn’t be very surprised if — (wrongly, however) — he took it badly that I went to the south before him.3 For us to say we’d never have benefited from knowing him would be relatively unfair since, 1, he made us a gift of a very fine painting (which painting, let it be said by the way, we intended to acquire),4 2, Reid made Monticellis go up in value, and since we own 5 of them the result for us is that these paintings have increased in value5 — 3, he was good and pleasant company in the first months.6  1v:2
Now for our part we wanted him to take part in a bigger deal than the Monticelli one, and he pretended not to understand very much about it.7
It seems to me that in order to be even more clearly entitled to stay masters on our own terrain regarding the Impressionists — so that there can be no doubt about our good faith towards Reid — we could leave him alone and let him do as he thinks fit regarding the Marseille Monticellis. Making the point that dead painters are only of indirect interest to us from the monetary point of view.
And if you agree with this, if need be you can tell him on my behalf too that if he intends to come to Marseille to buy Monticellis he has nothing to fear from us, but that we’re entitled to ask him his intentions in this regard, given that we came to this territory before he did.  1v:3
About the Impressionists — it would seem fair to me that they should be introduced into England through you, if not by you in person. And if Reid made a move first, we’d be justified in thinking he had acted in bad faith towards us, all the more so since we’d have left him free regarding the Marseille Monticellis.
You would definitely be doing our friend Koning a favour if you let him stay with you8 — his visit to Rivet must have proved to him that it wasn’t we who advised him badly.9
If you did feel like taking him in — and it seems to me that it would get him out of a mess, you’d just have to get things straight with his father,10 so that you wouldn’t have any responsibilities, even indirect ones.
If you see Bernard tell him that so far I’m having to pay more than at Pont-Aven,11 but that I think if you live here in furnished rooms with middle-class people it must be possible to save money, which I’m trying to do, and as soon as I’ve found out I’ll write and tell him what seem to me the average expenses.
At times it seems to me that my blood is more or  1r:4 less ready to start circulating again, which wasn’t the case lately in Paris, I really couldn’t stand it any more.
I have to buy my colours and canvases from either a grocer or a bookseller,12 who don’t have everything one might wish for. I’ll definitely have to go to Marseille to see what the state of these things is like there. I had hoped to find some beautiful blue &c., and in fact I haven’t given up, seeing that in Marseille you should be able to buy raw materials first hand. And I’d like to be able to do blues like Ziem — which don’t change as much as the others, well, we’ll see.
Don’t worry, and give the pals a handshake for me.

Yours truly,
Vincent

The studies I have are an old woman of Arles, a landscape with snow, a view of a stretch of pavement with a butcher’s shop.13 The women really are beautiful here, it’s no joke14 — on the other hand, the Arles museum is dreadful and a joke, and fit to be in Tarascon15 — there’s also a museum of antiquities,16 they’re genuine.
notes
1. Van Gogh started out paying 5 francs and later 4 francs a day for board and lodging. From 1 May onwards, when he had his studio in the Yellow House and consequently took up less space, he only paid 3 francs. See letters 587 and 603.
2. See for these studies the postscript and n. 13.
3. In the spring of 1887, the Scottish art dealer Alexander Reid, a friend of Theo and Vincent in Paris, had set up as an ‘agent en chambre’ (a dealer working from home) at 6 place d’Anvers in Paris. Alongside his job at Boussod, Valadon & Cie he also dealt on his own account in work by Puvis de Chavannes and others, and, one of the few people to do so, Monticelli. See Fowle 2000, p. 93.
Fowle thought it likely that Reid had gone to Marseille himself as early as 1886 or 1887 to look for work by Monticelli, or in any event that he had contacts there (Fowle 1993, p. 36). In view of the Van Gogh brothers’ interest in this artist, Reid evidently saw Vincent’s departure for the south of France as a threat to his monopoly in this field.
4. Reid’s gift was probably Monticelli’s Vase of flowers (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum). Ill. 306 . Van Gogh mentions this several more times. See also Fowle 2000, p. 94.
5. Van Gogh is referring to the following five works by Monticelli, which are mentioned in the correspondence: Vase of flowers (see n. 4), Woman with a parasol (letter 686, n. 17) and Woman at the well (letter 686, n. 16), Italian girl (letter 830, n. 7) and Arabs and horseman (letter 594, n. 7). See also exhib. cat. Amsterdam 1999, p. 206, n. 13.
6. The Van Gogh brothers befriended Reid in February 1887. See Fowle 2010, p. 31, and cf. also n. 3 above.
7. It transpires from the continuation of the letter that Vincent and Theo had plans to sell the work of the French modern artists in England in association with Reid; he, though, proved to have other ideas. To prevent Reid from muscling in on their territory, Vincent suggested leaving the trade in Monticellis in Marseille to him. He pursues the matter in letter 580. From letter 589 it emerges that it had been agreed with Reid that the Van Gogh brothers would help him find paintings for his stock, but that they had since fallen out with him because of the way he treated artists: Vincent accused Reid of being concerned with nothing but making money.
a. Read: ‘l’aurait’.
b. Read: ‘habiter’.
8. The Dutch painter Arnold Koning was in Paris from September 1887 to the end of May 1888. After Vincent went to Arles, Koning stayed with Theo in the apartment in rue Lepic for a short time. See also the letter from Theo to Willemien van Gogh (Documentation, 24 and 26 February 1888). Koning moved in with Theo soon after 14 March (FR b915); he returned to the Netherlands on 30 May 1888 (FR b1077).
9. Louis Rivet was Theo’s doctor in Paris; he had his practice at 6 rue de la Victoire. Koning evidently had health problems; we do not know what his ailments were.
10. Arnold Hendrik Koning, a lawyer in Winschoten.
11. Pont-Aven, a small village in Brittany, was discovered by painters around 1865, and grew to become a well-known artists’ colony. Bernard had been to Pont-Aven in August 1886 and had met Paul Gauguin there. The latter had been staying there again since late January 1888, as he had told Van Gogh (letter 581). The group of artists who worked there in Gauguin’s style is known as the School of Pont-Aven. See exhib. cat. Paris 2003. The cost of living in Brittany and the south of France had evidently been a subject of discussion between Bernard and Van Gogh.
c. Read: ‘habitant’.
12. We do not know which bookshops in Arles sold paint and canvas. Not long afterwards, Van Gogh says that he knows a grocer who sells artists’ supplies; this was probably Jules Armand. See letter 583, n. 8. It may well also have been possible to buy artists’ materials in Bompard fils’ wallpaper (papiers peints) shop at 14 place de la République; it is clear from the local newspapers that work by local artists was regularly displayed in the shop window. On the basis of accounts given by Jeanne Calment, who said she met Van Gogh through her cousin, it has been assumed that Van Gogh bought his canvas in the fabric shop run by Jeanne’s aunt, the Widow Calment. However, there is no evidence of this.
13. These three studies are respectively: An old woman of Arles (F 390 / JH 1357 ), Landscape with snow (F 290 / JH 1360 ) and View of a butcher’s shop (F 389 / JH 1359 ). There is another Landscape with snow (F 391 / JH 1358 ), but that must be the painting referred to in letter 582, where Van Gogh talks about a ‘whitened landscape’.
14. The beauty of the women of Arles was legendary and a popular topic in nineteenth-century art, literature and theatre. See exhib. cat. Arles 1999 and Dorn 1990, p. 152. Michelet had also written about it in L’amour, which Van Gogh knew well: ‘In Paris a young man sees a beautiful young girl with regular features. He falls in love. He marries, and is eager to get to know the place his wife comes from, the town of Arles ... He sees a hundred, a thousand young girls who are just as pretty. It is the beauty of a whole population, the beauty of Arles, that he has loved’ (Un jeune homme voit dans Paris une belle demoiselle de traits réguliers. Il est épris. Il épouse, puis est curieux de connaître le pays de sa femme, la ville d’Arles ... Il voit cent filles et mille aussi jolies. C’est la beauté d’un peuple entier, la beauté arlésienne qu’il a aimée). Michelet, L’amour, p. 313.
15. Van Gogh is referring to the Musée Réattu in Arles, in the former Grand-Prieuré. Baedecker describes it as ‘a small collection of paintings, many of them copies, so called after its founder, a painter from Arles’ (une petite collection de tableaux, dont beaucoup de copies, ainsi nommée de son fondateur, un peintre arlésien). Baedeker 1889-2, p. 213. Van Gogh’s sarcastic reference to Tarascon leads us to suppose that he had meanwhile become familiar with the picture of it that Alphonse Daudet sketched in his satirical novel Aventures prodigieuses de Tartarin de Tarascon (1872). It emerges from letter 609 that Van Gogh knew this book, and he must also have read the sequel, Tartarin sur les Alpes (1885), at about this time (see letter 583, n. 9).
16. The Musée Lapidaire was housed in a former church opposite Saint-Trophime at place de la République. The museum was ‘especially rich in ancient and Christian sarcophagi, made of marble and with bas-reliefs, that came from the Alyscamps’ (surtout très riche en sarcophages antiques et chrétiens, en marbre et à bas-reliefs, provenant des Aliscamps). Baedeker 1889-2, p. 212.


-
From: Vincent van Gogh
To: Willemien van Gogh
Date: Arles, on or about Friday, 24 February 1888

My dear sister,
For my part, I could just as well say that I’ll stop writing to you immediately at the moment you reply to me;1 the simplest thing is not to write if it’s too much trouble and one doesn’t always feel inclined.
But be this as it may, it’s very good that you’re starting by finding out what sort of harm that wretch Voltaire has done — and you’ll certainly find this in Candide, that Voltaire dared to laugh at the ‘highly serious life which we ought only to devote to or spend on the best ends’.2
And I don’t have to tell you that this crime is terrible enough in itself.
I can’t really write about Mauve, I think about him every day, and that’s all there is to it. It has affected me very badly3 but personally, as a human being, he was perhaps very different from what people sometimes said, that’s to say deeper in life itself than in art perhaps, and I loved him as a human being — now I find it so hard to imagine that those who penetrate to the heart of life,  1v:2 who by the way judge themselves as if it were another, and deal with others with as little embarrassment as if they were dealing with themselves, I find it so hard to imagine that such people cease to exist.
Now I know that it’s fairly impossible for the white potato or salad grubs that turn into May bugs later to be capable of forming credible ideas about their future overground existence.
And that it would be rash of them to undertake overground studies to throw light on this question, since the gardener or others interested in salad and vegetables would immediately trample them underfoot as being harmful insects.4
But for parallel reasons I have little faith in the rightness of our human ideas concerning our future life. We can no more judge our own metamorphoses impartially and sagely than the white salad grubs can theirs.
For the same reason that a salad grub has to eat salad roots for its higher development —
so I believe that a painter has to make paintings — perhaps that there’s something else after that.  1v:3
You see that I’ve gone somewhat further to the south — I’ve seen only too clearly that I cannot prosper with either my work or my health in the winter — moreover, nowadays people are demanding colour contrasts and highly intense and variegated colours in paintings rather than a subdued grey colour. So I thought for one reason and another that I wouldn’t do anyone any harm if I just went to what attracted me.
Give Ma my warmest regards; for the time being there will certainly not be any chance of my coming back to Holland. Regards.

Vincent
notes
1. Vincent is replying here to an unknown letter from Willemien, in which she must have expressed her disappointment that he did not write often (cf. letter 574). It is also clear from Theo’s letter to her that Vincent did not write much: ‘Vincent started writing to you ten times and I have read more letters to you than you have received from him, but sometimes one begins rattling away if one has finally got started, and then it is better to start afresh. But his letters are always interesting, which is why it’s a pity that he doesn’t write more’ (FR b914). See for the complete letter: Documentation, 24 and 26 February 1888.
2. See for Voltaire’s Candide: letter 568, n. 3. Van Gogh is not quoting literally here; it may be that he is paraphrasing the theme of the book in Panglossian terms, but it is more likely that he is quoting from Willemien’s last letter: she must have read the book because of what Vincent said about it in his previous letter to her (letter 574).
3. Anton Mauve, Van Gogh’s first teacher, had suddenly died on 5 February 1888 (Laren, Civil registration). He was 49 years old.
4. This metaphor may derive from Frederik van Eeden’s De kleine Johannes (1887), which Van Gogh undoubtedly chose in order to appeal to Willemien’s frame of reference. (Van Gogh was to refer to the book again later; see letters 626 and 740). De kleine Johannes is a Bildungsroman disguised as a fairy tale, in which Johannes tries to find ‘wisdom’ with the help of various allegorical fairy-tale figures. The contrast between idealized nature and man is the connecting thread throughout the book.
The metaphor in the letter possibly relates to an episode in chapter 3, which tells the story of a young maybug who, searching for a ‘serious calling’ for which he will be rewarded with eternal happiness, believes that he has to fly upwards to the light, whereas his real calling is to eat leaves. In his premature attempt to reach ‘the house with the bright light’, however, he is caught by humans and eventually trodden underfoot.


-
From: Vincent van Gogh
To: Theo van Gogh
Date: Arles, on or about Monday, 27 February 1888

My dear Theo,
Would you read the letter I’ve written to Mr Tersteeg — and would you send it to him with a letter from you if you judge the move is right.1 You see, for myself I thought we had to make an effort from this end, because we’ll have Reid through Van Wisselingh2 and Van Wisselingh through Tersteeg.3 And that’s what you’ll explain to Tersteeg yourself. Fed as I am by you — and as you draw your own income from the firm of Boussod Valadon & Cie, I don’t want to do anything against the firm. On the contrary, I ask no more than this, that what you’ve started in the shop on the boulevard should last and become more important.4 But you need support from other employees in the firm. If Tersteeg refuses to get involved in it we still have Reid and Wisselingh as English agents. You know that Van W. has married the daughter of the Glasgow picture dealer who’s in competition with Reid.5 If Reid takes the Impressionists, if he finds a way of starting up there,  1v:2 and if he tries to do that against the rest of us, from that moment we’re entitled to let his opponent over there know what’s going on. But if Wisselingh ever gets involved, and especially if today or tomorrow you have a chat with W., Tersteeg could immediately complain: why did you, esteemed employee of our firm, who handles the Impressionists, not tell me what was going on?
So you’ll have to talk to Tersteeg about it first, and to save you the trouble of writing a long letter it is I who have written it this time.
You could add to it by saying something vague about the question of Reid and the Impressionists and the interest that Van Wisselingh may subsequently have, hence the complications of this matter.
And what I’ve said in a postscript, namely that in view of the low prices compared with the interest the paintings present, Tersteeg should easily be able to sell about fifty in Holland, and besides he’ll be obliged to have some, because if people are already talking about them in Antwerp and  1v:3 Brussels,6 they’ll be talking about them in Amsterdam and The Hague too before long.
Anyway, what’s proposed in the letter is by no means unpleasant either for Tersteeg or for you: you’ll show him round all the studios and he’ll see for himself that next year people will be talking a lot and will keep on talking about the new school for a long time. If, though, you think the letter is badly timed you have my full permission to burn it. But if you send it, suggest the same thing to him yourself.
But you’re well aware that Tersteeg is at home in English business matters like a fish in water, and so it’s entirely possible that it’s he who would control the way these new paintings are doing over there. Really, this way Tersteeg and the London manager7 would organize the permanent exhibition of the Impressionists in London — you would have the one in Paris and I would start it up in Marseille.8 But Tersteeg will have to see a lot for himself first, and that’s why a grand tour of the studios is a good idea at this point; you’ll explain to him the whole importance of the matter as you go round.
The artists’ association is all the more likely to come about since Tersteeg  1r:4 won’t be against our having the artists’ interests at heart, nor that above all we want to increase the cost price of a painting, which in fact wouldn’t be saleable if it cost nothing.
In any case, we’ve got to talk about this boldly now, haven’t we — and Mesdag and others have got to stop POKING FUN at the Impressionists.9 It will be helpful in any case for Tersteeg to be interviewed on this subject.
You see that for myself I still see the crux of the matter in England, either artists will give their work to the dealers over there at miserable prices, or artists will get together and themselves choose intelligent agents who aren’t usurers. Now think the matter over — and send the letter or burn it, as you think best. It’s not a cut and dried thing I want to send you, but I’d very much like to see Tersteeg involved because he has the necessary self-assurance.
I shake your hand firmly.

Vincent

I have one more study.10
notes
1. In the coming weeks Vincent and Theo were to try to kindle Tersteeg’s interest in French modern art; Van Gogh wanted to involve Tersteeg in dealing in work of the Impressionists in England by means of the letter referred to here.
2. The contact between Reid and Van Wisselingh dated from the 1874-1882 period, when Van Wisselingh in London was a partner of the Scottish art dealer Daniel Cottier, and Reid was working in Glasgow. Van Wisselingh, Cottier and William Craibe Angus, an art dealer in Glasgow, acted as agents for one another. Reid joined them later, but the ties to his business were looser. See Heijbroek and Wouthuysen 1999, p. 27.
3. Van Wisselingh had done his training at Goupil’s branch in The Hague (1864-1866) and then worked at the firm’s headquarters in Paris (1866-1874). Between 1881 and 1890, as an independent art dealer, he was an important customer of Goupil’s in The Hague, where Tersteeg had been manager since 1867. See Stolwijk 1998, p. 218 (n. 104).
4. Since 1886 Theo had regularly exhibited and sold work by the Impressionists in Boussod, Valadon & Cie’s upstairs gallery in boulevard Montmartre.
5. On 1 July 1887 Van Wisselingh, who had had his own art gallery in Amsterdam since 1884, married Isabella Murray Mowat Angus in Glasgow. She was the daughter of William Craibe Angus. See Heijbroek and Wouthuysen 1999, p. 27. Angus was Reid’s main competitor in the trade in Monticellis in Scotland.
6. There was a greater awareness of recent developments in French art in Belgium than there was in the Netherlands. In January 1884 a group of Belgian artists, among them James Ensor, Theo van Rijsselberghe and Octave Maus, founded Le Groupe des Vingt in Brussels. Like the Société des Artistes Indépendants set up in Paris the same year, Les Vingt’s aim was to promote modern art in various ways, including staging annual exhibitions – to which foreign artists were also invited. Les Vingt published the weekly L’Art Moderne. Revue Critique des Arts et de la Littérature.
The Impressionists had been well represented for several years at Les Vingt exhibitions, which drew large crowds. The fifth exhibition of Les Vingt had opened at the beginning of February 1888, with works by Anquetin, Caillebotte, Toulouse-Lautrec, Guillaumin, Signac and others. See exhib. cat. Brussels 1993 and Delevoy 1981, p. 125 ff.
a. Read: ‘à l’aise’.
7. David Croal Thomson managed the London branch of Boussod, Valadon & Cie from 1884 to 1897. In April 1889 he staged an exhibition of twenty works by Monet. See Fowle 1993, pp. 53-54 (appendix 2).
8. One of Van Gogh’s motives for going to the South was to look for opportunities to draw attention to the work of the Impressionists and that of his own generation in Marseille (see also letter 601).
9. See for the Dutch art world’s predominantly condescending and negative attitude to French Impressionism: Tempel 1999.
10. It is not known which new study this was. Previously it was thought to be Bowl of potatoes (F 386 / JH 1365), but that painting dates from early 1889; see Van Tilborgh et al. 2012, pp. 112, 119.


-
From: Paul Gauguin
To: Vincent van Gogh
Date: Pont-Aven, on or about Wednesday, 29 February 1888

My dear Vincent,
I wanted to write to your brother but I know you see each other every day1 and I’m afraid to trouble him, occupied as he is with business from morning till night.
I have left to work in Brittany (always the rage to paint), and I had high hopes of having funds for that. The little I’ve sold went to pay off some pressing debts, and in a month I’m going to find myself with nothing. Zero  1v:2 is a negative power.
I don’t want to put pressure on your brother, but a brief word from you on this subject would set my mind at rest, or at least enable me to hold on. My God, how terrible these money matters are for an artist!
And if we have to make some reductions don’t worry, as long as I find some funds.2 I’ve just spent a fortnight in bed, struck down again by fever,3 and I’m getting back to work. If I can eke things out for  1v:3 5 or 6 months I think I’ll bring back some good canvases.
A word of encouragement in reply if possible.4

Ever yours,
Paul Gauguin

Pont-Aven, at Madame Gloanec’s
Finistère5
notes
1. Gauguin was evidently unaware that Van Gogh had gone to Arles; he himself having left Paris for Brittany on 26 January. See Merlhès 1989, p. 61.
2. In December 1887 Theo had taken several recent works by Gauguin on commission. He showed four paintings, The beach at Dieppe (W178/W166), Bathing at the watermill in the Bois d’Amour (W221/W272), Landscape with swine (W229/-) and Coming and going (W245/-), and five ceramic objects by Gauguin, followed in January by the exhibition of one painting, Two female bathers (W241/W215). On 26 December 1887 Theo had made his first sale of one of his works, Bathing at the watermill in the Bois d’Amour, for 450 francs. See Wildenstein 2001, pp. 217, 276, 287, 328, 314, 608.
3. In 1888 Gauguin suffered for several months from the after-effects of the malaria, dysentery and hepatitis he had contracted during his trip to Panama and Martinique with the painter Charles Laval (from April to October 1887). See exhib. cat. Washington 1988, p. 45.
4. In letter 583 of about 9 March, Vincent told Theo that he had written to Gauguin and given him Russell’s address in the hope that he would buy work by Gauguin.
5. Gauguin was staying in the boarding-house run by Marie-Jeanne Gloanec-Morvan in Pont-Aven, 13 place de la Mairie, Finistère (Brittany). Cf. Correspondance Gauguin 1984, pp. 433-436 (with a photograph of the boarding-house).


-
From: Vincent van Gogh
To: Theo van Gogh
Date: Arles, on or about Friday, 2 March 1888

My dear Theo
I was very pleased to receive your letter and the rough draft of the letter to Tersteeg and the 50-franc note.
Your letter to Tersteeg is perfectly good in the draft, I hope you didn’t spoil it too much when making a fair copy.
It seems to me that your letter to Tersteeg adds to mine — myself, I regretted the state in which I had posted it. Because you’ll have noticed that the idea of getting Tersteeg to take the initiative in introducing the Impressionists to England only came to me when writing the actual letter, and was only partially expressed in a P.S. added afterwards. While in your letter you explain that idea to him more fully. Will he understand? Indeed — it concerns him.
I’ve had a letter here from Gauguin,1 who says he’s been ill in bed for a fortnight. That he’s broke, since he’s had to pay off some pressing debts. That he’d like to know if you’ve sold anything for him but that he can’t write to you for fear of bothering you. That he’s under so much pressure to earn a little money he’d be determined to reduce the price of his paintings still further.
I can do nothing about this business from my end except write to Russell,2 which I’ll do this very day.  1v:2
And after all, we’ve already tried to get Tersteeg to buy one.3 But what can we do, he must really be hard up. I’m sending you a few lines for him in case you have something to tell him,4 but open letters if any come for me, because you’ll know sooner what’s in them if you do that and that will save me the trouble of telling you what’s in them. This goes once and for all.
Would you risk buying the seascape from him for the firm?5 If that were possible he would be out of difficulties for the time being.
Now it’s very good that you’ve taken in young Koning,6 I’m so glad you won’t be living alone in your apartment. In Paris one is always suffering, like a cab-horse,7 and if on top of that you have to live alone in your stable it would be too much.
About the Independents’ exhibition,8 do whatever you see fit.
What would you say to showing the two large landscapes of the Butte Montmartre there? It’s all much the same to me,  1v:3 I’m inclined to place slightly more hopes in this year’s work.9
There’s a hard frost here, and out in the country there’s still snow — I have a study of a whitened landscape with the town in the background.10 And then 2 little studies of a branch of an almond tree that’s already in flower despite everything.11
Enough for today, I’m writing a note to Koning.12
I’m really very pleased that you’ve written to Tersteeg, and I have hopes that this will be the renewal of your relations in Holland.
With a handshake to you and to any pals you may meet.

Yours truly,
Vincent
notes
1. This is letter 581. Vincent was to send it to Theo to read, together with letter 583.
2. Van Gogh wanted to ask John Peter Russell, whom he had got to know in Paris, to buy a painting from Gauguin. He repeatedly returned to this question; Russell, however, was non-committal, as we learn from letters 616, 650 and 679.
3. We do not know which of Gauguin’s works this was, but there is a good chance that it was one of the five paintings that Theo had on commission. See letter 581, n. 2.
4. It emerges from letter 583 that on second thoughts Van Gogh wrote to Gauguin direct rather than enclosing a letter for him.
5. Paul Gauguin, The beach at Dieppe, 1885 (Copenhagen, Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek; W178/W166). Ill. 2143 . This work had been on commission with Boussod, Valadon & Cie since December 1887; see letter 581, n. 2. Theo sent it to the Hague branch in March 1888. See letter 589, n. 4.
6. Koning – Van Gogh refers to him as ‘young’ – was 27 at this time.
7. In his letters Van Gogh repeatedly used the image of a worn-out cab-horse as a metaphor for the hard life of man in general and the artist in particular. See e.g. letters 148, 211, 599 and 611. In the Netherlands he had read the poetry of François Coppée, who had written a poem, ‘Cheval de Renfort’, about it (from the collection Le cahier rouge). See Coppée 1880, p. 163.
8. The fourth exhibition of the Société des Artistes Indépendants was due to be staged in Paris from 22 March to 3 May 1888. This society, founded in 1884 by Odilon Redon, Albert Dubois-Pillet, Georges Seurat, Paul Signac, Charles Angrand and Henri Edmond Cross, invited artists to exhibit at its alternative Salon, where the works were not adjudicated.
9. These landscapes are Montmartre: behind the Moulin de la Galette (F 316 / JH 1246 ) and Vegetable gardens in Montmartre (F 350 / JH 1245 ). The third work Theo chose was Piles of French novels and roses in a glass (‘Romans parisiens’) (F 359 / JH 1332 ); see letter 584, n. 13. See Société des Artistes Indépendants. Catalogue des Oeuvres exposés. 4e Exposition. Exhib. cat. Paris 1888, p. 42, cat. nos. 658-660.
Theo interpreted Vincent’s offhand attitude towards the selection of the works as a sign that he did not really care about being represented at this exhibition: ‘He himself doesn’t attach much importance to this exhibition, but here, where there are so many painters, it’s essential to make himself known and the exhibition is the best means of doing it’ (FR b915, Theo to Willemien, 14 March 1888).
10. Landscape with snow (F 391 / JH 1358 ); cf. for this identification: letter 578, n. 13.
11. Sprig of almond blossom in a glass (F 392 / JH 1361 ) and Sprig of almond blossom in a glass (F 393 / JH 1362 ); they both measure 24 x 19 cm.
12. This enclosed letter to Koning is not known. Theo told Willemien about Koning in his letter of 14 March 1888: ‘It still seems strange to me that he [Vincent] has gone, he was so important to me in recent times. Now the studio will soon be occupied again, by a young Dutch painter, but he has by no means as much talent as Vincent, although he’s not bad’ (FR b915).


-
From: Vincent van Gogh
To: Theo van Gogh
Date: Arles, Friday, 9 March 1888

My dear Theo,
Now at long last, this morning the weather has changed and has turned milder — and I’ve already had an opportunity to find out what this mistral’s1 like too. I’ve been out on several hikes round about here, but that wind always made it impossible to do anything. The sky was a hard blue with a great bright sun that melted just about all the snow — but the wind was so cold and dry it gave you goose-pimples. But even so I’ve seen lots of beautiful things — a ruined abbey on a hill planted with hollies, pines and grey olive trees. We’ll get down to that soon, I hope.2 Now I’ve just finished a study like the one of mine Lucien Pissarro has, but this time it’s of oranges.3 That makes eight studies I have up to now.4 But that doesn’t count, as I haven’t yet been able to work in comfort and in the warm.  1v:2
The letter from Gauguin that I had intended to send you but which for a moment I thought I had burned with some other papers, I later found and enclose herewith.5 But I’ve already written to him direct and I’ve sent him Russell’s address as well as sending Gauguin’s to Russell, so that if they wish they can make direct contact.6 But as for many of us — and surely we’ll be among them ourselves — the future is still difficult. I do believe in a final victory, but will artists benefit from it, and will they see more peaceful days?
I’ve bought some coarse canvas here and I’ve had it prepared for matt effects,7 I can now get everything, more or less, at Paris prices.
On Saturday evening I had a visit from two amateur painters,  1v:3 one of whom is a grocer — and also sells painting materials — and the other a justice of the peace who seems kind and intelligent.8
Unfortunately I’m hardly managing to live more cheaply than in Paris, I need to allow 5 francs a day.
For the moment I haven’t found anything like a boarding-house, but there must surely be some.
If the weather also gets milder in Paris it will do you good. What a winter!
I daren’t roll up my studies yet because they’re hardly dry, and there are some areas of impasto that won’t dry for a while.
I’ve just read Tartarin sur les Alpes, which I greatly enjoyed.9
Has that bloody man Tersteeg written to you? That’ll do us good anyway — don’t worry.
If he doesn’t reply, he’ll hear people talking about us all the same, and we’ll make sure he has nothing to fault in what we do. For example, we’ll send Mrs Mauve a painting in memory of Mauve10 with a letter as well from us both in which, if Tersteeg doesn’t reply, we won’t say a word against  1r:4 him but we’ll make it understood that we don’t deserve to be treated as though we were dead.
In fact, it’s likely that Tersteeg won’t be predisposed against us after all.
That poor Gauguin has no luck, I do fear that in his case convalescence will take longer than the fortnight he had to spend in bed.
For Christ’s sake, when are we going to see a generation of artists with healthy bodies? Sometimes I’m really furious with myself because it isn’t good enough to be iller or less ill than others, the ideal thing would be to have a strong enough constitution to live for 80 years and along with that, blood that was real good blood.
But we could take comfort if we felt that a generation of more fortunate artists was going to come along.
I wanted to write to you straightaway that I’m hopeful winter’s over now and I hope it will be the same in Paris. Handshake.

Yours truly,
Vincent
notes
1. The mistral is a cold, dry katabatic wind from the north-west or north, which blows in the Rhône valley and the coastal regions of south-east France.
a. Conflation of the expressions ‘à peu près’ and ‘tant soit peu’, which both mean ‘almost’.
2. The medieval abbey of Montmajour on the plain of La Crau, about five km to the north-east of Arles. Van Gogh often worked in the immediate vicinity of the abbey and depicted it in several works.
3. The study with the oranges is Basket of oranges (F 395 / JH 1363 ). In Paris Van Gogh had exchanged his Basket of apples (F 378 / JH 1340 ) for several wood engravings by Lucien Pissarro (FR b886).
4. These eight studies are: An old woman of Arles (F 390 / JH 1357 ), Landscape with snow (F 290 / JH 1360 ), View of a butcher’s shop (F 389 / JH 1359 ) (see letter 578); an unidentified study (see letter 580); Landscape with snow (F 391 / JH 1358 ), Sprig of almond blossom in a glass (F 392 / JH 1361 ), Sprig of almond blossom in a glass with a book (F 393 / JH 1362 ) (see letter 582); and the Basket of oranges (F 395 / JH 1363 ) referred to above.
5. This was letter 581.
6. Van Gogh was trying to persuade Russell to buy a work from Gauguin (see also letter 582). As far as we know, Gauguin and Russell never got in touch. Merlhès suggests that Gauguin was too proud to approach Russell. Correspondance Gauguin 1984, p. 474 (n. 242).
7. Van Gogh means canvas with a ground that absorbs surplus oil, producing a matt effect. See Peres et al. 1991, pp. 26-27. He painted Avenue of plane trees (F 398 / JH 1366 ) and The Gleize bridge with washerwomen (F 396 / JH 1367 ) on this type of canvas.
8. The grocer was Jules Armand, ‘épicier-droguiste’, 30 rue du Quatre-Septembre. Stokvis mentions a Madame J. Armand, the widow of a grocer who was an amateur artist, ‘where Vincent occasionally bought what he needed’. Coquiot calls her ‘the widow of a colourman, where Vincent bought supplies the first few days’. See Stokvis 1929, p. 4, and Coquiot 1923, p. 164.
Jules Armand was the first known owner of Marcelle Roulin (F 440 / JH 1639). In the Museon Arlaten in Arles there is a portrait of an Arlésienne, signed ‘J. Armand 1889’. We know from the local newspapers that he regularly exhibited his work in the window of the Bompard fils’ wallpaper shop at 14 place de la République, under the name Armand-Ronin. The official deeds give his name as Jean Auguste Armand; on the electoral roll and in address books it is Jules Armand; Ronin was the maiden name of his wife Joséphine (ACA).
At this time there were two justices of the peace in Arles: Paul Marre for the western canton, and Eugène Giraud for the eastern canton (L’indicateur marseillais 1888). The one who visited Van Gogh must have been Giraud. In May 1888 Van Gogh went to see him about a dispute with his landlord; see letter 609, n. 1.
9. Alphonse Daudet’s Tartarin sur les Alpes (1885), like Tartarin de Tarascon (1872), is a satirical novel that mocks the men of southern France, and particularly the inhabitants of Tarascon. The central character, Tartarin, a self-proclaimed lion-hunter and the president of the Tarascon mountain climbing association – whose members have never been further than the foothills of the Alpilles – goes to Switzerland to conquer the highest peaks in the Alps and strengthen his position as president before the elections. Tartarin is a know-it-all, who tries to rescue himself from embarrassing situations that he himself has caused.
10. Mauve died on 5 February. Around 30 March, in response to his death, Van Gogh painted Pink peach trees (‘Souvenir de Mauve’) (F 394 / JH 1379 ) and decided to give it to Mauve’s widow, Jet Mauve-Carbentus. See letter 590.


-
From: Vincent van Gogh
To: Theo van Gogh
Date: Arles, Saturday, 10 March 1888

My dear Theo,
Thanks for your letter and the 100-franc note enclosed with it. I very much hope that Tersteeg will come to Paris soon, as you’re inclined to believe. That would be very desirable in the circumstances you describe, in which they are all at bay and hard up. I find what you write about the Lançon sale and the painter’s mistress very interesting.1 He’s done things of really great character, his drawing has often made me think of Mauve’s. I’m sorry not to have seen the exhibition of his studies, just as I’m really sorry not to have seen the Willette exhibition either.2
What do you say to the news that Kaiser Wilhelm is dead?3 Will that speed up events in France, and will Paris stay calm?4 It seems doubtful. And what effect will all this have on the trade in paintings? I’ve read that it seems there’s a possibility of abolishing import duty on paintings in America, is that true?5
Perhaps it would be easier to get a few dealers and art lovers to agree to buy Impressionist paintings than to get the artists to agree to share equally the price of paintings sold.
Nevertheless, artists won’t find a better way than — to join together, give their pictures to the association, and share the sale price in such a way that at least the society will be able to guarantee the possibility of existence and work for its members.  1v:2 If Degas, Claude Monet, Renoir, Sisley and C. Pissarro were to take the initiative and say: here we are, each of the 5 of us gives 10 paintings (or rather, we each give to the value of 10,000 francs, the value estimated by expert members, for example, Tersteeg and yourself, appointed by the society, and these experts also invest capital in the form of paintings), and, furthermore, we commit ourselves to give to the value of... each year.
And we also invite you, Guillaumin, Seurat, Gauguin &c. &c. to join us (your pictures being put to the same assessment from the point of view of value).
Then the great Impressionists of the Grand Boulevard,6 giving paintings that become common property, would retain their prestige, and the others wouldn’t be able to criticize them for keeping to themselves the benefits of a reputation gained without any doubt by their own efforts and by their individual genius in the first place — but — nevertheless, in the second place, a reputation that is growing and is now also being consolidated and supported by the paintings of a whole battalion of artists who have so far been working while constantly broke.  1v:3 Whatever happens — it’s really to be hoped that the thing comes off, and that you and Tersteeg become the society’s expert members (with Portier perhaps?).
I have two more studies of landscapes,7 I hope the work will continue steadily and that in a month I’ll get a first consignment to you — I say in a month because I want to send you nothing but the best, and because I want it to be dry, and because I want to send at least a dozen or so all at once because of the cost of transport.
Congratulations on buying the Seurat8 — with what I send you you’ll have to try to make an exchange with Seurat as well.9
You’re well aware that if Tersteeg joins you in this venture, the two of you will easily be able to persuade Boussod Valadon to extend substantial credit for the purchases needed. But it’s urgent, because without that other dealers will cut the ground from under your feet.
I’ve made the acquaintance of a Danish artist10 who talks about Heyerdahl and other people from the north, Krøyer, &c. What he does is dry but very conscientious, and he’s still young. Saw the exhibition of the Impressionists in rue Laffitte11 at the time. He’ll probably come to Paris for the Salon, and wants to tour Holland to see the museums.12  1r:4
I think it’s a very good idea that you put the books in the Independents’ too. This study should be given the title: ‘Parisian novels’.13
I’d be so happy to know you’d succeeded in persuading Tersteeg — well, patience.
I was obliged to buy supplies for 50 francs when your letter arrived. This week I’ll start work on 4 or 5 things.
I think about this association of artists every day, and the plan has developed further in my mind, but Tersteeg would have to be involved, and a lot depends on that.
Nowadays, the artists would probably allow themselves to be persuaded by us, but we can’t go ahead before we have Tersteeg’s help. Without that we’d be on our own, listening to everybody moaning from morning till night, and each of them individually would be constantly coming to ask for explanations — axioms — &c. Shouldn’t be surprised if Tersteeg took the view that we can’t do without the Grand Boulevard artists — and if he advised you to persuade them to take the initiative in an association by giving paintings that would become common property and cease to belong to them individually. It seems to me that the Petit Boulevard would be morally obliged to join in response to a proposal from that side. And those Grand Boulevard gentlemen will only retain their current prestige by forestalling the partly justified criticism of the minor Impressionists, who’ll say: ‘you’re putting everything in your pocket’. They can easily reply to that: not at all, on the contrary, we’re the first to say: our paintings belong to the artists.
If Degas, Monet, Renoir and Pissarro say that — even leaving plenty of room for their individual ideas about putting it into practice — they could — say worse, unless — they say nothing and let things ride.

Ever yours,
Vincent
notes
1. The Lançon sale is the auction of the estate of the artist, who had died in 1885: Tableaux, dessins, aquarelles, sculptures et eaux-fortes. Oeuvres de Auguste Lançon, Paris (Hôtel Drouot), 5-6 March 1888 (Lugt 1938-1987, no. 47131). No information about Lançon’s mistress has been found.
2. Adolphe Willette, known for his illustrations for the Montmartre magazines, Le Chat Noir and Le Courrier Français, had a retrospective of drawings and paintings in Paris in 1888. The exhibition, which was held at Tripp et Cie’s gallery, opened on 20 February. See Adolphe Willette. Catalogue tableaux et dessins. Paris (34 rue de Provence) 1888, and La Revue Indépendante (March 1888), no. 17 (vol. 7), p. 481.
3. Wilhelm i, Emperor of Germany and King of Prussia, died on 9 March.
4. It was feared that Wilhelm i’s death could be the spark that detonated a political time bomb which had been ticking for years: since France’s defeat at German hands in the war of 1870-1871, there had been a cold war between the two countries that threatened to escalate at any time. When the Kaiser died his son was already so seriously ill that he was only given a few months to live. In his turn he would be succeeded by his son Wilhelm ii. There was considerable fear that he would initiate a war. The Kaiser’s death also increased the risk of a Russian attack on Germany because of a conflict over the Balkans. People were convinced that France would support the Russians were it to come to a confrontation.
5. It has not been possible to trace Van Gogh’s source of this news. In 1883 the USA had raised import duties on works of art from 10 to 30 percent, which had an adverse impact on French artists. Evidently there was a discussion about reduction or abolition, but it was not until 1892 that the rate was lowered to 15 percent. See Fidell-Beaufort 2000, p. 103.
6. Van Gogh described Degas, Monet, Renoir, Sisley and Camille Pissarro as ‘Impressionists of the Grand Boulevard’ because their reputations were already established and their work was exhibited by renowned galleries like Boussod, Valadon & Cie, Durand-Ruel and Georges Petit, which were in or near the chic boulevards around place de l’Opéra. Van Gogh saw opportunities for an association of these artists with the younger generation of artists of the ‘Petit Boulevard’, among whom he counted Guillaumin, Seurat and Gauguin, as well as Bernard, Anquetin, Angrand, Toulouse-Lautrec, Signac, Lucien Pissarro and himself. By ‘Petit Boulevard’ he was referring to the neighbourhood around boulevard de Clichy and boulevard de Rochechouart in Montmartre, where the younger men had their studios and exhibited in cafés. See Richard Thomson, ‘The cultural geography of the Petit Boulevard’, in exhib. cat. Saint Louis 2001, pp. 65-108, esp. 66.
It emerges from letter 625 that the Van Gogh brothers had already made plans for a society of this kind in the winter before Vincent’s departure – each artist would hand over fifty paintings. Van Gogh set himself the goal of having his share of fifty paintings ready by the following year. He refers to this number again in letters 625, 626 and 631.
7. These were most probably The Gleize bridge with washerwomen (F 396 / JH 1367 ) and Avenue of plane trees (F 398 / JH 1366 ), which are painted on coarse canvas (see letter 583) and are mentioned in letter 585. Pollard willows with setting sun (F 572 / JH 1597 ) is also a possibility. Cf. for the new dating of March 1888 for this last work: cat. Otterlo 2003, pp. 202-205.
8. At the Pillet sale in Paris (Hôtel Drouot, 2 and 3 March 1888; Lugt 1938-1987, no. 47127) Theo had bought a drawing by Georges Seurat for 16 francs; it was Woman singing in a café-chantant, 1887 (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum). Ill. 424 . See exhib. cat. Amsterdam 1999, p. 179.
It emerges from a letter from Lucien Pissarro to his father Camille of 12 March 1888 that Theo was not at the sale in person, but got Emile Bernard to buy the drawing for him: ‘he had young Bernard buy the drawing that Seurat had put in the sale, it fetched very little, because you know how stingy he is, he wasn’t there, otherwise I would have gone back to chat to him and find out the price’ (il a fait acheter par le petit Bernard le dessin que Seurat y avait mis, il a été payé tres bon marché, car tu sais comme il est chien, il n’y était pas sans quoi je serai rentré pour bavarder avec lui et en apprende le prix). See Letters of Pissarro 1993, pp. 105-106.
9. No exchange between Van Gogh and Seurat ever took place.
10. The Danish painter Christian Vilhelm Mourier-Petersen was in Arles from about 10 October 1887 to around 22 May 1888, apart from a brief stay in Martigues at the end of March 1888. On 16 March 1888 he wrote about meeting Van Gogh: ‘Initially I considered him to be mad, but by and by I note that there is method in it. He knows the friends of Jastrau: McKnight, Russell etc. – but at the moment I can’t remember his name: Van Prut or something of the kind.’ See Larsson 1993, pp. 14, 26.
11. Van Gogh must be referring here to the last Impressionist exhibition, which had run from 15 May to 15 June 1886 in a gallery in rue Laffitte. It included work by Degas, Guillaumin, Gauguin, Seurat and Camille Pissarro. See exhib. cat. Paris 1886-2.
12. Mourier-Petersen went to Paris around 22 May. The Salon in 1888 ran from 1 May to mid-July. He stayed in Paris for almost three months, and then spent November and December 1888 in the Netherlands. See Larsson 1993, p. 29.
13. Piles of French novels and roses in a glass (‘Romans parisiens’) (F 359 / JH 1332 ). See for the other two works by Van Gogh at this exhibition: letter 582, n. 9.